foreign
[Music]
podcast
this will be a monthly podcast where you
look at the life and the work of Carl
Poppa as always I'm going to be your
host Jet Li Henry but on today's program
we have Professor physics at Center of
quantum computation at Clarendon
laboratory as well as an honorary fellow
at Wilson College he's also the author
of two books that I have on my shelf
here that I've read more times than I
care to admit and this is the fabric of
reality in the beginning of infinity
this is David Deutsch David welcome to
the podcast
hi good evening
so for many people that have read your
work or listened to your lectures they
will know that popper has been
influential to you of your life but I
might wind things back to your first
chance meeting with the worker popper
this is a story I've heard you say
before it's when you were back in your
University days you're a student I
believe you're at Cambridge and it was
almost a chance encounter with popper so
take us back there yes it was pure
chance
um I had literally just heard of popper
once before
out of context I'd heard that he he'd
written a book called conjectures and
refutations and I thought oh that seems
quite interesting I thought it was a
book of conjectures and reputations but
but you know I hadn't read it and I
hadn't read any popper and I only
remembered the name because it's an odd
name
and uh I I
got to hear of him this is the story
you've probably heard
um I was an undergraduate I I wanted to
do research in physics and
um
I was very curious about about finding
out about the known and unknown things
about physics but I uh I realized that
I'd never really thought about what
knowledge
in physics is and so I went to the
Bookshop and and got a book by Bertrand
Russell I I I've actually forgotten
which one it was but it had a lot about
induction in it
and so I wrote an essay about induction
and how I hoped to make it make use of
it in my future career
and uh I was quite pleased with the
essays so I I
we were supposed to meet
once a term with with what they call in
Cambridge a tutor it's what's called in
Oxford a moral tutor it's it's like it's
not
Judah doesn't give you tutorials the
tutor is kind of in charge of your moral
welfare and like if if you uh get into
trouble or or something then he's the
one that he that you go to in the
college and he helps you out and
whatever
um and my tutor was a a historian
called Charles Parkin
um
and uh I never knew what to say to him
on these on these um uh timely physics
because it was all like you know how
you're doing have you had any problems
and I I you know that that wasn't
I I wasn't like that kind of client for
him
uh so I never knew what to say and it
was it was always slightly awkward so I
I thought I'd send him before I went to
see him I thought I'd send him this
essay
and uh he's said oh you know very
interesting but you know you've gone
about induction here uh isn't that a bit
how old hat you know hasn't that been
like refuted by this popper chappie
and uh that was very rare in those days
for anyone to have heard of popo
especially uh someone in the humanities
and
um I I said basically no I I didn't know
he had anything to do with induction and
I've only once heard of him and he said
well yeah uh I think I think that's what
they what they say nowadays which also
wasn't true uh
most most philosophers science thought
that Pablo was ridiculous and everybody
else hadn't heard of him
his books were quite hard to get
um and uh so I went straight to the to
the Bookshop after this recommendation
um
I think it was
heifers in in Cambridge and and the only
book by Papa I could find was the open
society and its enemies
volumes one and two
um so volume one was about Plato volume
two was Hegel and Marx and I didn't see
how this could be of any interest uh but
I thought hagelin Marx would be nearer
you know nearer to the present day at
least
so I bought that one
and I I found that it it it you know it
was a completely new way of looking at
philosophy
and I was just bowled over by the by the
uh sheer seriousness of
the way Papa dealt with ideas
um
I I I'd been quite impressed with
Bertram Russell but uh Papa just
outclassed him in in in this feature
both of them were quite clear in their
writing which I later found is very very
unusual in philosophies both of them
um so that that's that's how I got into
proper and as it were having read that I
then bought
um volume one and read that as well uh
and and that kind of told me what volume
2 was really all about
and uh uh then I slowly picked up
found whenever I passed a Bookshop I
would go in and see if there are any
popper books in there you know there was
no Amazon in those days either
so um yes I I slowly got to read it and
but it took me about four years
to actually really get anything like
I thought Papa was all about
falsificationism and and
um
uh I I I didn't really get the
connection between his political
philosophy and
uh and his philosophy of science and I
didn't really get
the philosophy of science either but I I
I I I saw that there was something there
that was really really important
and so I I carried on thinking about it
and um that's how I became a popperian
well that's that's built up towards that
thing that is so important and I'm gonna
probably come back to your answer there
a little bit later on and uh there's
some a lot of things that ping my mind
that I'm going to bring up later on but
let's go back to uh one of the
centralities of popper here and this of
course is of course some knowledge of
how we know and you have this wonderful
um history I believe it's in the
beginning of infinity where you explain
this deep course of human history and
you describe it as a history I believe
of complete failure
um but you describe the people alive at
the time and I think this has missed a
lot of people that have read your book
or listen to your lectures by you
describe them as people that all wanted
to know so what did you mean by that
yes um
I I think the the our species
is is
distinguished from other species by this
capacity to know in the human sense that
is to create explanations of the world
um and
and
um I I think this actually predates our
species but all the other species that
had this ability went extinct
um they're all related to our species
um
uh neanderthals and and those species
we're the only survivors
and uh that's already a bit of a mystery
because if you have this ability
then you're constantly trying to explain
the world it it
um it it was beneficial we know that it
evolved relatively fast as these things
go
um and uh therefore it must have been
beneficial to the to the genes that uh
the people with these genes tended to
reproduce more survive more
uh so as to propagate those genes
uh and
uh
therefore it must have been beneficial
and yet
if we look at the paleontology and uh
archeology and so on of those times we
find that
full
thousands of years at a time
the Rhythm the content of human life
was unchanging
so for for a for an individual an
individual would live and die
uh using the same methods of of getting
food of of uh making tools uh of
organizing uh Society or families and so
on
um
making campfires or whatever they were
all the same at the time of their death
as at the time of their of their birth
and in fact they were the same for for
uh hundreds of generations at a time
so what was going on what was going on
at that time
um
uh for this
unique ability which had been so useful
when it evolved
not to do anything useful anymore why
Why didn't it
and uh well you know now we're used to
creativity operating on the time scale
of of a year or two
uh you can already tell that the things
are old-fashioned uh after a couple of
years in those days they weren't
old-fashioned over a period of 10 000
years
so why
um and some people say
well they they already had
a pleasant way of life a way of life
that suited them uh they didn't they
didn't apply creativity to to
um uh trying to make better campfires or
better stone tools uh they they used it
for something of which there is no Trace
perhaps they used it for song or or
dance or or
um having deeper relationships with with
their families and so on but I that's
obviously
untenable because we know that they had
very short life spans that they died of
things that are very painful and
unpleasant and for which the uh cures
were very very simple by our standards
um
for example
better shoes cooking their food
um
uh and and
um and yet they didn't improve they they
did they didn't improve these things
over tens of thousands of years
so
they wanted better but they didn't get
it that's what I mean
so um let's uh step that four then
another step here what what were these
original sources of knowledge for um so
if we wind back the clock two times I
suppose before the Enlightenment what
were the sources of knowledge is it only
coming from Authority at that time
oh yes well it it came from tradition uh
which is still the case today
um or all our knowledge is is based on
tradition but we we change it faster we
improve it faster in those days it also
came from tradition but the tradition
included
traditions of stasis
um that is
um
uh the the ways of dealing with ideas
were fine-tuned to keep the ideas
unchanged
and the the paradigmatic example of this
is religions which actually say
explicitly that if you change it then
then you will suffer eternally or
whatever
uh but that's actually rather unusual
um it's rather unusual for for
traditions and ideas to explicitly say
that they want to remain in place it's
it's it's more usual for them just to be
evolved to have that property
uh so yes it it uh source of knowledge
was tradition and that was also a source
of a great deal of error
that that is the The Human Condition the
the the our ideas are always full of
errors
but uh nowadays it's much less the case
that they are entrenched errors there
still are many entrenched eras today
but our
entire society and way of life is no
longer built upon them
so I can see us building this forward to
the problem situation that popper found
himself in so
um you mentioned the Enlightenment and
this important moment where authorities
are rejected but you also go on to say
that rejecting authorities is is is not
quite as important as it always was and
of course one of the the things one of
the implements which people brought
about to reject Authority this time was
what you mentioned earlier empiricism so
uh what what was the change there and
what was empiricism
yes as I said
um the um
uh the uh authorities had been
challenged many times in fact it's quite
common for uh authority to be challenged
and overturned but what had historically
been the case is that authorities had
been overturned and replaced by new
authorities of the same kind
uh and so there's this poem by Yates of
the the uh the the the the Beggars that
change places but the Lash goes on
uh
uh that was the usual way what happened
in in the enlightenment was a new thing
that that uh may have also happened many
times before less often but uh on all
previous occasions it had been snuffed
out within a generation or two
uh and that was
um
uh challenging Authority for the purpose
not of setting up a new Authority but
for the purpose of
um
creating new knowledge
that is the idea was that
um what we were rebelling to do
was to have an open-ended increase in
knowledge
so you began to get the idea that that
in the whole of the Enlightenment was
pervaded by the idea that
humans are fallible
but that we can improve and that the
important thing is to set up conditions
under which progress Improvement is
possible
uh which uh contradicted uh almost all
previous Traditions the very idea of a
tradition is something that stays the
same
but
um with the enlightenment can this new
kind of tradition which papa called
tradition of criticism
which he traces back to the pre-socratic
philosophers in ancient Greece
but uh it never took hold as a
um a fundamental feature of society
before
or at least not as a lasting feature of
society until the European Enlightenment
of the 18th century
so from that
um of course we're walking through
philosophies and bacon and for the human
of course one of the solutions that
philosophers came up through the years
for the problem of empiricism
um was induction an idea in in short
that uh the answer not just the UN that
the Unseen in some ways resembles the
scene and um of course Papa has a deep
challenge to this so why is it that the
Unseen doesn't resemble the scene
because I know and I've encountered many
people myself this scene this feels it
seems to feel instinctively true for
many people even many scientists in the
field that have been there for many
years they seem to have this instinctive
feel that you can somehow gather
knowledge simply by observing the world
yes it's um it's surprisingly tenacious
this idea since uh it is in fact refuted
all all the time by all our experiences
so uh it it's simply not true that the
future resembles the past
um what what I I guess
um and by the way I should say in your
quick history of philosophy you left out
the fact that empiricism when it was
invented
was an enormous Improvement on what went
before
uh even though it's said that that
knowledge comes from the senses which
which is not true that it comes from
observation which is not true uh that we
can uh gain Authority by observation so
which is also not true none of those
things are true but it was contradicting
the previous alleged sources of
knowledge and Authority
namely
um political Authority from Kings and
and so on and and uh the authority of
um ancient writings in in philosophy in
science and so on and the authority of
course of religion in Morality and so on
um it was challenging all those
and that was initially
uh an enormous benefit but it simply
wasn't true from beginning to end that
that uh we we gain knowledge in that way
and uh this had and with empiricism as
as you said came induction the the more
specific idea that we get it from uh
looking at repeated things in the past
and we see the repeated things in the
past tend to be repeated in the future
now
careful philosophers notably David Hume
um but it goes right back to antiquity
notice that
um
there is no such process
that that no such form of justification
that that no
sequence of propositions
can possibly tell you anything about the
next proposition
if you have some sequence of
propositions that you know nothing about
the next one then you cannot deduce
anything about the next one from the
previous ones the simply a simple
logical fact and that
pulls the rug out from under empiricism
and people had known that therefore that
an empiricism that induction is invalid
but they thought that perhaps we still
do it even though it is invalid and
there's something that you know that
something beneficial about the universe
that that just makes it so that that
inductions turn out to be true quite
often
uh and it it isn't the case that the
vast majority of
things that you see when you from when
you open your eyes in in the morning
to when you uh fall asleep at night you
have never seen before
there is something about them
that you have seen before
um like when you when you look out of
the window in the morning and you you
see the sun and the clouds and so on you
have seen the Sun and clouds before if
if you were to
take an image of those and look at the
pixels
there would be many pixels that weren't
the same as yesterday's pixels and it
would never be the case that that most
of the pixels are the same as what they
were yesterday you might not even look
out of the window you might not look out
in the same way and so on so the reason
why we subjectively tend to think that
we're seeing the same things is that we
have a theory about what it is
in the scene
that is important what it is that will
have regularities that we can rely on
and that is because we have theories to
that effect and so this leads to the
poppers Maxim that the Theory comes
first
induction may seem to be true
because
um
we make the observations in the light of
theories come on
my my mobile phone thinks that when I
say
when I say Theory I'm saying Siri
I cannot get it I cannot get it to rid
itself of that preconception
um so it it probably thinks that it's
heard the word Siri many many times yes
and uh has thought it was Theory many
many sorry Theory thought it meant Siri
many many times and so this is uh this
is an additional case and we'll make it
even more sure of that in the future
this is of course paraphrasing an
anecdote of poppers where he was
chatting to the
uh was it Adler this the psychoanalyst
um one of one of the psychologists I
think it was Adler where where he Adler
had just interpreted something according
to his theory and Papa said how do you
know and and he said in the light of my
thousand-fold experience
and so Papa replied and I suppose with
this case your your experience has
become a thousand and one fold
hmm at which point supposedly uh Adler
was very angry
um but this just all goes to show that
the induction just isn't true it's not
just
that
induction is invalid which is logically
invalid which is something that had been
known since antiquity
but but that Papa added to this that
induction just doesn't happen it's it's
not that we do it but it's invalid but
it somehow works we don't do it what we
do is we have a theory first and in the
case where we're creating new knowledge
this theory is a conjecture
which is not based on anything it's it's
it's a hoped for solution to some
problem so
in proper scheme of things instead of
starting with observation and inducing
General theories we start with a problem
then we guess
a solution then we test it and that
that's the place where
where observation comes in like at step
three not at step one
well I might actually dig into that
question a little bit there because of
course we've just walked into the great
problem that popper found himself within
in fact I believe it's um objective
knowledge the book he starts it off with
this I'm going to paraphrase slightly
here he starts off the book with
something like I I believe I solved the
problem of induction many years ago but
no one paid any attention to it and this
is and it goes on and he does sound a
little aggrieve that he's not being
listened to and it's hard to blame him
if he's repeating himself so often here
I imagine but
um you said something really important
there it's really uh an interesting way
to look at the world of course this idea
that the world I think is Papa's quote
the world is Theory Laden but you said
it starts with a problem and uh Papa had
a quote I believe he says if you want to
understand someone's philosophy or
Theory you need to understand their
problem their problem situation so why
is it that uh knowledge starts from a
problem
yes by the way it's observation that's
theory-laden oh the world is Theory Lane
um yeah well the the reason it starts
with the problem is is this is how the
this is the only possible way that
um
that knowledge could grow since there is
no
Justified or reliable or probable source
of knowledge
like observation was supposed to be or
like the holy books were supposed to be
since there is no such thing
um we we have to begin
with some unjustified knowledge and we
have to have some reason for wanting to
improve it and that that reason is is
called a problem and in in some sense it
always consists of a conflict I either a
conflict between two ideas you know that
that
uh that that um Oasis seems to be out
there but we know that there's just
deserts so how can that be so there's a
conflict between theories which which is
a problem or it might be just the the
the problem might be that uh we would
like to know how to how to
um prevent our food from spoiling
um so that we are in less danger of uh
being going hungry
and uh so there's a case where uh some
factual theories are conflicting with a
moral theory uh about about what we want
or with a desire about what we want
um
and
the only way we can make progress from
having these existing theories which are
in Conflict to having theories which are
in less conflict
is by Guess guessing and that's the
conjecture
so uh we guess and most of our guesses
um what what we do next is we we
criticize them
and we see whether for example whether
they look as though they're they're
going to solve the problem or or whether
they're
um whether they are a bad explanation
um
uh if
um if somebody proposes as a conjecture
um we are uh
maybe if we if we um
put the food in the dark maybe it won't
spoil you know that that's sort of we
know now that that's kind of halfway to
a solution
um but
if you have no explanation to go with
that then you can't distinguish it from
the explanation
if we put the food in the light it won't
spoil or if we cover the food in Grass
it won't spoil or if if we let our
animals eat half of it you know so
there's an infinite number of
um possible conjectures what we want is
a conjecture that's a purported
explanation
of that that will meet the problem
um and uh yeah we now know that the
better answer would be put it where it's
cool and dry
um uh and
um very slowly General theories
come out of these conjectures one of the
conjectures that
um
uh solves a particular problem
has generality and turns out to solve a
lot of other problems that's what I call
Reach and it sometimes happens and um
when it does we we sort of
um
get a leg up so that we can see further
than we saw before on the on the
um in the landscape of knowledge
so why does it have to be start with
problems there is nothing else
well some people listening might
instinctively say why can't it start
with a foundation why can't we wind back
to something that we are certain to be
true I'm using that word in inverted
commas here why can't we wind it back as
you know so many other philosophers have
done over the years wind it back to some
first principles some found in some
foundation and then build up truth from
there
yes
um a sort of bootstrap
um
pulling oneself up by one's own
bootstraps uh and it it's in a way it's
it's a mistake for the same reason as
that is
um
uh the foundation
um for this idea of deducing Knowledge
from a foundation
depends on that Foundation being secure
and having in it basically all knowledge
already implicit in it and indeed people
did think there were such things
um in the past and
as I said holy books but also traditions
and
uh the
um
uh
the trouble is
that
um
they were false
all the things that
um were have been used as purported
foundations
um have been proved wrong even in pure
mathematics where it was thought that
um uh
mathematical proof was the ultimate
Arbiter of whether scientific sorry of
weather mathematical propositions are
true or false
was proved itself proved wrong in the
20th century by Kurt girdle
so
um
so there are no there are no foundations
there are no possible foundations
because of the bootstrap problem that
we'd have to justify the ultimate source
of justification and there's no
justification for an ultimate source of
justification
um so
that's that's a problem and as some
people have concluded that therefore
knowledge is impossible
um which again is is rather observed uh
if you consider that that that
um
it's not a coincidence that you and I
are speaking at a distance of several
thousand miles
um it's because a great deal of
knowledge has gone into creating the
means for us to do that
um so there is knowledge but we we
didn't get it from any foundation there
therefore it must be conjectural
how can that be
uh since conjectures uh in a conjectures
are not judged by where they came from
well it is because they are judged by
whether they solve the problem or not so
we're not looking for theories that are
going to be true forever we're looking
for ways of correcting mistakes in our
existing theories if they are
problematic
so let's let me again drill into that
for a second because
um again I I'll get you to shoot me down
a little bit here because I can imagine
people listening and thinking well if
all we have is this error correction and
we can only be certain of or anything
and we can never have a foundation for
anything and fallibleism is the way
forward here then um it may give some
sort of um sucker to the uh
post-modernists who say there is nothing
then there is no truth that could that
if if we can ever be sure or anything is
true then what is to say that that is
truth that truth actually exists out
there in the world how do we know there
is an objective truth even if we can
ever be sure that we have it yes
um part of this is is what
post-modernists uh uh
call truth and and therefore conclude
doesn't exist indeed doesn't exist
so uh this is this is a token of how
radical a change
Papa wrought on on philosophy
um the notion of Truth in Papa's
philosophy
is different from that of postmodernism
and and of all traditional philosophy
where where basically
um knowledge was defined as Justified
true beliefs
um
so
the
critical attack on that
actually popper attacks all three of
those
alleged properties of knowledge and and
but in particular the attack on
justification
which is not unique to Papa
um
forces one to conclude that justified
true belief doesn't exist
and if you call that truth then truth
doesn't exist but this this isn't what
we call truth in everyday life what we
mean by truth in everyday life is that
if somebody tells me
um
uh the shops are going to shut today
because of lockdown
then
um that is a statement that's capable of
being true and for all false I can go
and see whether the shop is open on
chart not
um
with perfect reliability of course a
shot may look open yet be shut or vice
versa
um uh and there's there's no limit to
how misled we can be
um but nevertheless it is Meaningful to
uh say that that
um the
statement that the the shop is open it
is true if and only if the shop is in
fact open
um this this uh theory of Truth is also
not original to Papa it was uh it's in a
way the common sense theory of truth but
uh it was made systematic by
the mathematician uh task key
uh who I Who proper recounts that he
explained it to him
uh while sitting on a park bench in in
Vienna
um interestingly
papa says that
he had built his philosophy of science
um initially without ever referring to
truth because he was afraid
that
um
critics would say that there is no such
thing or that that you can't coherently
talk about that sort of thing and it was
only when tasky explained his theory of
Truth his truth as correspondence to the
facts and and explained to him that this
could be made mathematically rigorous as
well
using using the idea of meta theories
um uh that that uh Papa with I think
with a sense of relief uh rewrote his
stuff uh so as to actually speak about
theories being true of course no theory
that we can actually utter
is going to be exactly true so that the
notion of Truth in problems philosophy
has a slightly different role it when he
says we are seeking the truth he means
we are seeking to correct errors
but when we correct errors there are all
always other errors left
that we haven't noticed and also new
errors introduced by our removing the
old era so we're seeking the truth means
we're seeking to correct error but but
by that very fact
truth is a fundamental sort of
regulating principle in the theory of
knowledge according to Papa
uh not not because we can obtain
absolutely true propositions but but
because there is a meaning to something
being true or false
so copper has a very interesting quote
and you touched on it uh about half of
you touched in part a few answers ago
and when you said um or all claims to
foundations or all claims to
infallibleism uh proved to be wrong but
popper had a quote that went a little
bit further than that I've seen you use
it and for many people listening they
will think uh that doesn't sound quite
right when I first hear it but it does
it sinks in and seems to have a lot of
truth to it so I might get you to
explain it and Pauper says it I believe
it's like this he says the doctrine that
the truth is Manifest is the source of
all tyranny so not just infallibleism is
wrong but it's always going to lead to
tyranny as well
yes
um
so let me first say that that is not an
argument against
um
uh
against infallibleism it just because it
leads to bad consequences that we don't
like doesn't mean it's false
so uh the actual argument for
fallibilism
doesn't
involve this fact that contradicting it
leads to tyranny
however having having
um uh knocked down all claims to
infallibleism
we can then turn to this other important
fact which is which is also like
everywhere in Papa
that
um
uh
claims to
um well it goes both ways I suppose
claims to have an infallible source of
Truth leads to tyranny because
if you are obviously right then somebody
who contradicts you is obviously wrong
and that is an automatic justification
for using Force against them if they
insist on pursuing this wrong thing
um it also goes the other way around
if you want to
use Force when you fail to persuade
somebody
you need to explain at least to yourself
but in practice to to your followers and
to those who who would otherwise stop
you and perhaps even to your victims
um why it should be you
um imposing your will on them by force
rather than vice versa
um
you might say that that in some
ideologies it's the the ideology just
says that the the the stronger person
has the right but it's never really like
that that that's always just a
a paraphrase because
it's always in the form
um
I have this quality like you know
belonging to the master race or
something or
um having the divine right of kings or
uh whatever
which arguably gives me the right
because if you didn't have that then
then such and such a disaster would
occur and
um so
Authority about ideas leads inevitably
to Authority in the political sense and
vice versa
[Music]
if you're enjoying the podcast so far
and I apologize for this brief
Interruption but I will take this moment
to briefly send out a plug for the
podcast itself the paparian podcast is
something that I've been planning for
quite a while and it's something that I
want to keep running month to month but
to do so it's going to need your help if
you're willing or able or interested
please go to the links below the podcast
and support us however you can it will
be your helpers listeners that keeps the
podcast going and keeps the content
coming out and I thank you in advance
and with that said we will now return to
the second half of the interview thanks
for listening
[Music]
foreign
so let's step into that political sense
then and to those first two books that
you picked up um the open society and
its enemies and we touched on it a fair
bit there but one of the central things
that popper gets to when he starts to
apply his theory of science across to
um social matters and politics is uh he
looks at this history of philosophy and
then he looks at um democracy and he
says the big problem throughout the
years is that people don't really
understand democracy even though they
have it they think it's about choosing
the right leader and how to get the best
leader how to get the best policy and
papa famously says it's got nothing to
do with any of that so I might it'll
take us to the open society and that uh
fund that First Fundamental question
that he begins to open up there
yes
um as in in many of Papa's advances
it it starts with the problem
and it changes the question that is trip
that has traditionally been asked about
that problem to a different question
uh so in in regard to science it changes
the the question from how do we extract
theories from
observation and and says instead no
actually we don't and the real problem
is
um how can we improve our existing
theories
uh and uh in
political philosophy
he uh he he
um
expresses the traditional view as the
who should rule view that he he says all
traditional political political
philosophies have just assumed that the
problem is
we need to find who should Rule and and
how to ensure that
that person or people get to rule and
that they are
once they are ruling
and he says that that uh that is a bad
question
because every answer
uh what's his phrase
um
uh something like cries out for
authoritarianism
um because if you had an answer to who
should rule which was the right answer
then it would justify you in in using
Force against uh anyone who challenges
the ruler
uh is again the The Authority in regard
to politics creates a spurious Authority
in regard to knowledge as well
so he says let's replace that by a
better question which you know he kind
of says which should have been the real
question all the time namely
given that the rulers will make mistakes
how can we set things up so that their
mistakes can be corrected and the rulers
themselves can be replaced without
violence so the the problem with in in
politics being a being the the the
discipline of
how
Force should be used basically how laws
should be made and and enforced uh uh
how how do we
uh
improve policies and replace rulers
without violence
and he says that
democracy is the
uh the various forms of democracy are
jointly the the best ways of solving
that problem
um I would like to phrase that in terms
of legitimacy they they are they are way
of legitimizing
um obeying the law when you disagree
with it
the the that that it has gone through
the Democratic process
um is a is a very powerful way of
legitimizing that because uh otherwise
you have to say that
um you would prefer that that you impose
your your
uh theories and and and therefore
Democratic systems have to be judged not
as ways of implementing the rule of the
people
um
with the people being a sort of
imaginary thing that is is that is
imagined to rule
under democracy but it it is instead the
solution of
how do we
best remove ideas from being policies
and and the answer is through various
systems of voting
now there's a yeah sorry there's an
interesting side point to this and I
believe I heard you saying it a few
years ago and it I believe it comes from
popper
um you were saying it around the
question when brexit was still very much
being debated in the Public Square
and uh it I think it does apply a lot
today when people have the strange
tendency to look at our democracies and
lament how messy they all look and how
how conflicted we all feel and seem and
often have this strange
um adoration for authoritarian regimes I
think perhaps I could be like that
because it seems to work with a bit more
Harmony and a lot less mess and open
um infighting and you've said this and
of course I think it's from popper he
says uh of course if democracy is all
about the best error correcting system
the era correct bad leaders and bad
policies uh it is also the case that
systems that are good at error
correction are going to make more
mistakes
yes they're going to make more mistakes
um more small mistakes
the the authoritarian systems of course
always collapse eventually because they
are less able to solve problems that's
the whole point
and
um so you you can have
by the way it's it's it's so
it's we tend to look at long-lived
authoritarian systems
like long-lived monarchies or the the
um Egyptian pharaohs and so on
but most authoritarian systems don't
last longer than the dictator
uh the or they or even shorter than that
um
the the the
practice of entrenching particular ideas
and particular leaders
um
is not it itself a source of knowledge
it's going to entrench mistakes
and it's it's uh only a matter of time
until a problem comes along that the
knowledge in that system
uh
can't solve and where where the ideas
that would solve it
um don't come into existence because
um
proposing rival ideas has been
suppressed in that system
so uh the uh the Mirage is that we see
some long-lived
um authoritarian system
and we we imagine that it's going to
last forever because it it says it will
um and and we compare it with with the
messiness and working across purposes
that happens in Democratic systems and
we say look here people are working
against each other they're in that
system they're all working towards one
end
um okay so the end might be slightly
wrong but at least they're making
progress you know and and then it
collapses
um I remember that that uh by the way uh
this reminds me that
uh
in in in the 1980s early 80s or
something
uh some guy wrote a book called
um will the Soviet Union survive until
1984. so it must have been before 1964.
this book was written and I remember how
the how people
uh
uh ridiculed this the idea that that the
Soviet Union is going to collapse
was uh you know by induction they they
had seen it lasting for decades
unchanged in its system the idea that it
would collapse uh that was absurd uh
science fiction stories I remember
science fiction stories about
the distant future you know the two or
three hundred years ahead had
stories about the Soviet Union and the
United States as they will be in the
three or four hundred years time as as
as if as if
um uh neither of them was going to
change
uh and uh
it so this idea that the
authoritarian system
was unstable
seemed ridiculous
but it was perfectly true and they
always are
even the ones that last for thousands of
years which are the remote exceptions
um
cannot deal with problems uh for example
the Egyptian one was repeatedly
overthrown
and made very little progress in in the
thousands of years that it existed for
so on the other side of this again
focusing in on a lot of um the feeling
that some people seem to have about
democracy today and you touched on it a
little bit there um this idea of
consensus people have this um idea that
is very important to have consensus
inside uh democracy and of course part
of Papa's philosophy of um of political
systems uh not just involves
um uh not selecting the best leader but
beyond to remove bad leaders quickly but
it also has an implication that once we
do elect leaders that they actually add
a chance to govern and Implement their
policy and that runs against this uh
common notion today that we should all
be compromised and there should be
consensus on everything
yes well a compromise by definition is
something that nobody believes is a good
idea
or at least nobody believes it it's the
best available idea
and so it it's uh it starts out with
that inherent disadvantage
um
consensus
pleases no one but but there's a worse
thing about consensus which is that it
violates Papa's Criterion that that is
when consensus policies
that that nobody advocated
are put into effect then whenever
there's a problem nobody has been proved
wrong in particular the leaders haven't
been proved wrong they have what they
did was they negotiated a compromise and
and then enacted a thing they didn't
believe in
so uh it impedes
um
uh the removal of bad policies and bad
leaders so violates proper's Criterion
and politicians tend to love it because
politicians are always trying to evade
responsibility for when their ideas go
wrong and they often do because
politicians are fallible like everybody
uh what a politician would ideally like
is a way of staying in power
um
um without ever being held responsible
when things go wrong so they're looking
for ways of not being responsible and uh
systems of government that have
consensus like proportional
representation at their heart
also have
irresponsibility at the heart uh the the
ability to say not only does the buck
not stop here but it doesn't stop
anywhere because there was nobody who
advocated that in the first place
so to whine some of popper to the
current moment for uh for a brief
interlude here
um it is uh very common these days to
hear a lot of people speaking in um you
know looking at the American system but
also the British system back on brexit
it seems to run across countries at
different moments this and it's this uh
it's it's uh a fear that democracy is
failing in some ways people say um they
speak in terms like democracy is at risk
our very system is about to force an
existential threat to our society and
our system and I follow you on Twitter
and you're one of the common voices
telling people that you're not so
worried about this at all and I believe
uh you see a lot of this as a um a
crisis of Hyperbole and not a crisis of
democracy so in this world where people
talk about fake news and disinformation
campaigns and people seem to worry about
their whole system of democracy breaking
down why are you so calm about this why
do you think this is not the threat and
they're not they're all overreacting a
little bit
well uh so many things I
where do I begin
uh
first of all the the well there's this
hyperbole fad
which
um uh where it there's sort of
competitive hyperbole on on all sides
where people accuse each other of being
Nazis and fascists and enemies of
democracy and enemies of the human race
and and and so on over issues
that even 50 years ago would have been
regarded as laughably trivial
um the the the
um you know at the time of of the Great
Depression when millions of people were
literally going hungry in the most
advanced Societies in the world and
where totalitarian ideologies
were making inroads and actually getting
supporters
uh you know ideologies which were
literally
um uh threatening the end of
civilization
and
did ins despite all that danger and all
that suffering coming at the same time
um the uh institutions were never
seriously at risk
that is the institutions in in the
anglosphere let's say
um uh where where the enlightenment
traditions in politics
are the strongest
um they the the the the
um although there were
millions of people who were who were
fascist sympathizers and communist
sympathizers and anarchists and people
who blew things up and people who stage
General strikes and and so on
nevertheless
um such people did not win elections
there are very very few
um
adherence of extremist policies
one election in
um in say the 1920s and 30s
um
the uh so that level of assault on
institutions of consent
um
it seems to me it is like an order of
magnitude greater than anything we see
today
and yet people somehow because of this
hyperbole or perhaps it's the other way
around this is what causes the hyperbole
people I don't know which way around it
is
people seem to like the idea that they
are living in a time of
momentous challenge
where where the stakes are
exactly like or analogous to what the
stakes were in in in the second world
war you know where where it was good
against evil where if evil wins it's
it's the the end of civilization
and therefore
fighting against that is glorious and is
worthwhile and gives meaning to life
and so the more you can
um
talk in terms of these hyperboles
the more life seems worthwhile it's as
if
as if making
rapid quiet peaceful progress
which is what's actually going on all
the time now
isn't exciting enough
for
people when they are in political mode
all that's um open up another aspect of
that just from that answer of yours
um of course another aspect of the open
Society here is not just Democratic
systems but also the society itself and
I'm gonna I might introduce what I'm
this question with a quote of yours I
believe you gave it in a talk recently
when you're talking about AGI which
you've spent a fair bit of time focused
on recently and uh the quote runs like
this I'm going to cut it into two here
but it says the knowledge of how to
prevent people being dangerous is
counter-intuitive it took our species
Millennia to create it but now that we
but now that we do have the knowledge
okay the only way to prevent people from
being dangerous from uh to prevent
people from being dangerous is to make
them free and that um is a wonderful way
when I first heard it to summarize what
popper was trying to say here but many
people listening will will of course
think how is it that you make people
free and then that's the way to make
them non-dangerously is it not the case
that if people are free then they are
free to be dangerous so to speak
um
why are people law abiding
so the traditional answer was
because they're afraid of Retribution
um
that's not true
um over if that were true
the forces of Law and Order would be
totally overwhelmed as they are in
societies where people do lose respect
for the legitimacy of law in those
societies the political Order of Things
gets overturned and and then you know
the beggar on Horseback is replaced by
the beggar on foot but the Lash goes on
um
the enlightenment
created a radically new kind of society
a society where there is legitimacy that
is not based on fear and obedience but
is based on
uh
a reason on on identification with the
process
um a process that one considers Fair one
can
tolerate when when it makes a mistake
um you uh so there is a kind of Miracle
um I think uh Roger scrutin of all
people
um pointed this out that that we don't
recognize enough
how much of a miracle it is
that when
a party
loses power
in in a democratic country and
especially in the anglosphere
um
they just leave
they they leave
um not only do they leave
uh like the the
Reigns of power
the Army control of the police not only
do they leave all that behind but they
would actually fight and die
to enable their opponents
who they believe will ruin the country
with their economic policies or whatever
um to enable them to get into power
now this is amazing
and it it uh it it is counter-intuitive
if you think of
um
human interaction as being
mechanical as as if if you omit the
element of creativity
so if if no new ideas could be created
then the only way that existing ideas
could could
um confront each other would is is
ultimately by violence
and
um
uh
the enlightenment created a different
kind of society where where creativity
is harnessed to create not consensus but
consent
the thing about about progress is that
in the short run it involves a lot of
Confrontation and bickering and
um disagreement about what should be
done next and a lot of fuss being made
but in the long run
it causes unanimous agreement
so my favorite example being slavery
where where a couple of hundred years
ago almost everybody in the world took
for granted that slavery was a fact of
life
now almost everybody in the world thinks
that
um
kind of slavery is is one of the great
Abominations
and uh this this change happened through
the political process
um largely in the anglosphere
it's true that many societies
had
regulated or even abolished the slave
trade or slavery itself in the past
but this was this was uh this was
different this was not because of an
idea of that human rights transcend
other considerations
it was just sort of in the way that
governments often
free prisoners as well criminals to
create some good will and you know
whatever
um
the the west and especially the
anglosphere
adopted
a view about slavery that grew out of
their view of themselves
um it they they wanted slaves to be
freed for the same reason that they
wanted themselves to obey the law if
laws made by a party different from
their own
um so they identified with with the
tradition of criticism in preference to
their own particular views and that
there's this nice quote from popper as
well uh see if I can get this right some
something like um a rationalist to
someone who would rather not get his way
because he's failed to convince you then
to get his way by force yes exactly that
is that that sums it up nicely so it
also sum it up nicely on that top yeah I
believe this is you that said this and
I'm not sure if you got it from popper
or not but
um as you were speaking there I can
imagine some people thinking uh but is
it always possible to convince people
perhaps some people are just beyond uh
convincing and you have a quickly say
all failure is due to lack of knowledge
so yeah I imagine you have an a theory
or that
um if you fail to convince someone for
whatever reason
um if in fact what you're saying is true
then the failure is yours
yeah well it might be that they're that
they are so irrational that they didn't
want to listen to you
um you know you you may be right and
they're they're but nevertheless the
failure is yours in a bigger sense
because if they are irrational and not
listening their very existence is a
problem which will be solved one day
and and people will then uh
realize who was being unreasonable
um this this again it happens again and
again
um in in the history of our culture
and
let's step towards the future because uh
some of the really interesting work that
you did that that Step Beyond Papa was
to to look towards the future in some
ways and
um you write that um our our very
survival our the niche that we've carved
out for ourselves is one where you have
to create knowledge that's not in your
genes and of course this comes right
back to popper in some ways the idea he
has this famous quote of uh we get to
let our ideas die in our place so I want
you to introduce the difference between
um evolutionary knowledge and
explanatory knowledge and why when we
look towards the future it is so
important that we continue to create
explanatory and can continue to make it
to ex to create it uh as fast as
possible
uh yes well first of all non-explanatory
knowledge
um
goes extinct always
um so that there are no
species
today left over from a billion years ago
most species
um uh go extinct within within a few
million years or less
um so the the particular knowledge in
our genes that defines our species
um
will not stay in existence automatically
in fact what will happen unless it is
saved by other kinds of knowledge the
kind of knowledge in our minds
is that it will necessarily
be destroyed
and
I think it should be a rather
scary and and salutary thing to bear in
mind that every other species who had
this ability to create knowledge in
their minds is indeed extinct
um
some people think they're made extinct
by competition with our species but uh
whether or not that's true
um
we don't have a guarantee from the
almighty that we shall survive
um
everything points in the other direction
except the thing that makes us different
from all other existing species
the reason so that's the reason why we
have to change
we we have to change our our way of life
so that and in the course of
um solving problems that arise
um there will always be problems and if
we are to survive
the problem if there isn't going to be a
problem that it will destroy us as as
happens with other species then we must
create the knowledge to face it
the reason why it has to be fast
is I I think this is something you
mentioned uh at the beginning of our
conversation that that
um
individuals
have the power to create very large
problems and the more knowledge there is
in society
um the more
uh the fewer the the smaller the
proportion of people who are capable of
destroying Society of course to some
extent this has always been true I I
don't want to exaggerate this too much
and and become you know one of these
hyperbole people
um Genghis Khan
uh did a very good job of destroying
civilizations and he was just one man
uh and uh civilizations have been
destroyed uh before we don't need
nuclear weapons to destroy civilizations
in fact
almost all civilizations that have ever
existed have been destroyed either from
the outside with fire in the sword or
from the inside with just Decay and
failing to
um have a a way of coping with the next
drought or famine or disease
um
so
now we have the problem that weapons of
mass destruction and so on again give
individuals give the bad guys the
enemies of civilization the means of
destroying civilization unless
the knowledge of how to thwart them is
created
and
um well uh so long as
the realization are few in number we
have that going for us but but because
small numbers of people can create a
large amount of harm that's not enough
so the other thing we have going for us
is that the enemies of civilization are
mistaken they believe things that aren't
true and they base their enmity to
civilization on trying to entrench these
untrue things
and so long as they're doing that they
are
um impairing disabling their own ability
to solve problems that come up
um
that inevitably come up
um but also the problem they're trying
to solve of how to destroy a
civilization
uh so civilizations Advantage therefore
is speed that is civilization a good
civilization has the advantage that it
can solve problems including the problem
of how to defend itself against
evildoers
um so before we get to the last couple
of questions here this as you're
speaking there what echoed in my ear was
something really interesting and I've
heard you say so uh this
um rapid need to make programs and the
enemies of civilization
um of course many people out there are
worried that the AIS when they come or
the aliens will be enemies of
civilization but again you are not
you're one of the calm voices saying it
won't happen and I imagine uh correct me
from wrong that some of this comes from
the ideas of Papa that these people uh
these aliens or these AIS
just like us and they have they will
have to create acknowledge the same way
we have
um they so yeah let's go there why why
is it that you are not so worried about
uh this Lumen AI or alien apocalypse
well uh it it it's not that I am saying
it won't happen any more than I'm saying
that humans won't destroy civilization
um as I said there's never any guarantee
it's possible that that evildoers will
destroy civilization and it is possible
that Civilization will
um make progress too slowly and will be
destroyed by some unexpected problem
so it's that's always possible
but
but you're right to say that my view is
that that it's all about the knowledge
all these these considerations about
destroying or not destroying
civilization defending it are all about
knowledge creation and not about the
vehicle that happens to contain the
knowledge it makes no more sense to
regard
um
uh silicon-based intelligence
or as uh being more dangerous
then it makes sense to regard people
with a certain skin color as being more
dangerous
it is only the knowledge or the lack of
it which is dangerous
and uh
agis
artificial general intelligences when
when they are eventually developed
will be developed to be members of a
certain culture
um and
um
uh exactly as humans are and there will
be members of good cultures and bad
cultures the ones that are members of
bad cultures will be worse at solving
problems
than the ones that are members of good
cultures and uh we will there'll be no
difference to what I just outlined just
now that the the we we can hope that the
good ones are in the majority and we can
also hope uh that for structural reasons
the good ones will create knowledge
faster
and that that applies to agis just as
much as humans now you might say that
the whole problem though will be about
will be located in the agis because they
might be uh faster at thinking than us
but uh that's not true either because
um
that is confusing Hardware with software
um fast Hardware is available to us too
we already use supercomputers to
increase the rate at which we solve
problems and
um agis as it were just have super
computers built in but we can have that
too uh one once we have
um
um brain add-ons and so on if that's the
way it goes there are many ways that
that we can use technology
in addition to our
built-in technology and as as uh I've
often said
um pen and pencil or slide rules are
already using add-ons to our brains to
make our problem solving faster we take
that for granted
um doing it with computers we also take
for granted doing it with AGI type
Hardware
um we will take for granted you know
once we've had it for five minutes
so as as we begin to round this up I
might at first take you back to that
moment as when you're a student and you
first encountered popper and you said it
was luck and chance that you bumped into
him now I'm wondering as a question of
why you think that is the case I mean
this is one of those questions that when
students start philosophy they say this
is um of how do we know anything it
seems to be the most important question
in Philosophy for many people and after
all these centuries of people struggling
with the question proper seems to have
come along and given a very good answer
for it and as I I think I quoted him
earlier popper himself lamented that no
one was listening to him very much and I
I've heard you have discussions I'm sure
you must have interacted with it in
times when people say things like oh I'm
definitely a fallibist and I believe and
I and I I'm sorry I don't believe but I
I understand or yes there there can't be
a foundation I get that and then the
language switches back and they start
talking about well we must know
something for certain or if we start
from this Foundation here and I'm
wondering why you think that the meth or
if you think it is the case that the
messenger popper is difficult for some
people to internalize when it also seems
counter to counter-intuitively very
simple
uh basically I don't know and I I don't
know even
um counterfactually what would have
happened if Charlie Parker hadn't parked
in Sorry Charlie parking
um told me about Papa
thing is I I wasn't aware of being
interested in philosophy I I was and am
a physicist I I'm interested in
understanding the natural world
um I've got interested in philosophical
ideas because it was necessary to
understand them to do the kind of
physics that I do
um
the ideas have reach and uh that's taken
me into other areas as well
um and it is a mystery to me why
Papa
isn't understood as having
revolutionized as having made
substantial progress
in philosophy he's systematically
misunderstood by professional
philosophers
even more than by lay people
I don't know why that is but it's not
unique
um in in the fabric of reality I have
these four strands of all our existing
knowledge uh where I try and fit all our
existing knowledge into these four
fundamental strands and it is true of
Alan Turing with his idea of
universality people don't get it many of
many of the misconceptions about AGI are
due to misunderstanding Alan turing's
basic idea of
um of a computational universality and
it's the same with
um uh with the
neo-darwinism the modern synthesis that
that in in some sense every every
educated person
pays lip service to
Darwinism
and yet they often express this in terms
of the survival of the fittest in in
terms of shows that they don't actually
get it and then you have you have people
like like uh
Wilson and and so on who who who
suddenly turn around and and try to
explain
um the history of evolution in in terms
of
species selection and that kind of thing
so
it's
it's a not an unusual thing
for
um progress at the foundations which has
happened
um over the past Century or so
to be
not exactly
ignored because it's its presence is
ignored but the the
the
its status as
changing how we ought to look at the
world has has not taken has not been
taken on board I don't understand why in
any of those cases the fourth case is um
is Everett's uh many Universal
interpretation of quantum theory which
is within physics where I'm I'm kind of
rooted
I think it's a scandal that the physics
physics Community uh
it seems that there's an equilibrium of
10 to 15 percent of uh physicists who
work on quantum theory and I think in
terms of the uh Everett's many universes
uh so-called interpretation basically
that just is quantum theory
um and the rest just want to use it
instrumentally
I don't understand why
um but as I said it's it's uh it's
phenomenal in the 20th century perhaps
it's because
20th century is the century in which
philosophy itself both professional
philosophy and philosophy among
uh where it is corrupted common sense
um has taken a nosedive
so as a final question from that note
that um you met Papa we must end on this
question you met Carl you met Carl Poppa
uh of course many years ago so I must
ask you how was that meet and how did it
come about and uh yeah what happened
there
uh well it was amazing
um I have told this story before as you
as you uh indicate uh I went to meet him
with um my boss at the time Bryce DeWitt
who's a physicist
um
and uh
supporter of many Universal
interpretation popper had written some
very bad stuff and criticizing the many
Universal interpretation he he just
didn't get it from from beginning to end
he he he thought he he just completely
misplaced what what the
fuss was about what the controversy was
about
uh so I I I I had exchanged a couple of
letters with Papa uh and he he had
replied very politely
um uh and
um when Bryce DeWitt came to Oxford on
sabbatical
um I suggested that we tried and we were
talking about these foundational issues
and I suggested that we try and go and
uh go and try to
um speak to Papa and and persuade him
that he was mistaken so
um uh so I I wrote to him and uh then
phoned him we arranged to meet uh we we
drove there in my car and
um he lived in High Wycombe
and uh
and he met us and and talked to us very
graciously I I had heard from several
people that that Papa in person was very
unlike what he advocated in regard to
ideas that he was dogmatic that he got
angry when contradicted and so on so I I
sort of was prepared to roll up my
sleeves and and have a good old uh fight
um there uh uh metaphorically
um but but uh the very opposite happened
uh we sat down we were we were served a
nice tea I I can't remember whether it
was by his wife or not but
um
uh and he listened extremely attentively
to what we were telling him
um he he asked questions
uh he asked the right questions
um he and he said that therefore he was
going to have to
make some changes in a book that he'd
just written and that he was he was
going to have to change a lot of things
and and you know that it seemed to go
perfectly and and and then we got to
talking about something else uh are the
things that the the conversation moved
on to lots of interesting topics both in
physics and outside and I was I there's
again I've told this story before but I
kept having this strange sensation
that every time he said something uh and
and I was thinking oh my God I unbidden
the thought came to me
how weird that this old guy is so
accurate and so good at expressing pop
hearing ideas and then like and an
instant later I thought oh yeah it's
Papa
and this happened again and again during
the conversation
uh very strange psychological effect
anyway so we we were glowing with this
and and we drove back to Oxford and so
on a few months later this book came out
I forget which one it was actually
uh this book that he'd been writing came
out and we eagerly looked I eagerly
looked at it and it didn't have any of
the things
he he simply remained uh with all his um
misconceptions
so uh there you are I don't know what to
make of that but but uh personally he he
was not in the least uh harsh of putting
or dogmatic or any of those things he he
seemed to be exactly as
should be according to his philosophy
and that is also a wonderful note to end
the podcast on uh of course I'm going to
link below the podcast
um a link to David's personal website
you can find a link to uh his two books
the fabric of reality in the beginning
of Infinity but also to other lectures
and his ongoing work on things like
construct constructive theories so I
can't recommend people go there enough
you will enjoy it and it's always
fascinating and uh David thanks for the
time you've been so generous and also so
interesting as always uh thanks for
coming on the podcast well thanks for
having me and thanks for the plug
[Music]
foreign